---
    id: "02"
    title: 'Why Should I Choose NestJS and Prisma for my Next Project?'
    description: 'This blog post explores how NestJS and Prisma can help overcome common challenges with other frameworks and ORMS'
    releaseDate: 'Mar 5, 2023'
---

### [Back](/blogs)
# Why Should I Choose NestJS and Prisma for my Next Project?
Recently, I worked on a project built with Express, the most popular backend framework. However, we faced scalability and maintainability issues due to the framework's flexibility, which allowed developers to structure the code in any way they preferred. As the team grew, the codebase became unstructured and unscalable, making it difficult for new developers to work on the project. At that point, I realized that we needed a more reliable and robust framework to handle the growing codebase and team. 

To address these challenges, I decided to create a boilerplate using Express that would be scalable and maintainable. However, while researching the structure of backend applications, I found that every example I came across had its own set of rules and conventions, making it difficult to create a boilerplate that could be easily understood and followed by new team members while ensuring scalability and maintainability in the future. It would have taken a considerable amount of time to create one through research and discussions with the team.

During this exploration, I came across NestJS, which solved all the problems and answered all the questions I had with its modular architecture, built-in support for TypeScript, and a focus on convention over configuration. The following are the reasons that convinced me to use Nest:

### Powerful CLI:
The powerful CLI allows us to generate a full-fledged CRUD boilerplate code by running the following command in the project's root directory:
```shell
nest g resource
```

### Modular structure:
The modular structure of NestJS allowed us to break down the application into smaller, reusable modules that could be developed and tested independently. This made it easier to maintain and scale the application as it grew without thinking about the architecture of the application.

### Dependency Injection:
NestJS provides a built-in dependency injection container that allows us to manage dependencies easily throughout the application. For example, we can inject an injectable service called otherService into myService using the following code:

```ts
@Injectable()
class MyService {
  constructor(private readonly otherService: OtherService) {}
}
```

### TypeScript:
NestJS is written in TypeScript, which provides static typing and helps catch errors at compile-time. This is especially crucial for a large and complex application like ours, as it allowed us to catch errors early in the development process and reduce debugging time.

### Platform Agnostic:
NestJS is a platform agnostic. It uses express by default, but you can configure it to work with any other HTTP framework.



## Prisma 
When it comes to choosing an ORM for NestJS, I came across Prisma. Prisma is a next-generation object-relational mapper (ORM) that helps developers build applications faster with fewer errors. Prisma generates TypeScript code, which is used by the Prisma client for stricter type safety and rich IDE auto-completion features. Here are the reasons why I chose Prisma for my next project

1. **Excellent documentation:** Providing step by step guidelines likewise in nestjs
2. **Type-safe:** Prisma generates TypeScript types based on the database schema, which provides type safety and helps catch errors at compile-time. This was important for ensuring that the data model was consistent and that the application was robust and reliable.
3. **Database agnostic:** Prisma supports multiple databases, including PostgreSQL, MySQL, and SQLite. This allowed us to choose the best database for our needs without being tied to a specific vendor.
4. **Schema migrations:** Prisma provides tools for managing database schema migrations, which makes it easy to evolve the database schema over time. Comparing with Sequelize, Migrastions are dumb on sequelize, Prisma make it more easier and error prune to update the migration, while in seqluelize you need to manually update the migration , while prisma update it automatically.



## **Getting started with NestJS and Prisma**
To get started with NestJS and Prisma, you'll need to generate a NestJS project using the Nest CLI.

## Generate NestJS project
To create a new NestJS project, run the following command in your terminal:

```shell
npx @nestjs/cli new auth-module
```

This will initialize your NestJS project. You can start your project by running the following command:

```shell
npm run start:dev
```

To check if your server is running, go to **`http://localhost:3000/`**. You should see an empty page with the message **`Hello World!`**.


## Setting up Postgres instance
We will be using Docker to set up a PostgreSQL instance for our application, as it allows us to easily start and destroy containers.

Create a **`docker-compose.yml`** file in the root directory of your project, and add the following YAML to it:

```yaml
version: '3.8'
services: 
  dev-db:
    image: postgres:13
    ports: 
      - 5434:5432
    environment:
      POSTGRES_USER: postgres
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: secret
      POSTGRES_DB: root
```

This will create a container named **`dev-db`** with PostgreSQL version 13 and export it on port 5434.

Next, let's set up some scripts to start your Docker container. Add the following scripts to the **`scripts`** section of your **`package.json`** file:

```json
"db:dev:up": "docker compose up dev-db -d"
```

Run the postgres install in the background using the following command

```shell
npm run db:dev:up
```

## Create Prisma Module

Now that your database is up and running, it's time to configure Prisma with it.

### Installation

To get started with Prisma, we need to install two packages:

- Prisma CLI - this allows us to create a schema, run migrations, and deploy them.
- Prisma Client - this allows us to write type-safe queries.

To install these packages, run the following command:

```shell
npm i -D prisma
npm i @prisma/client
```

Next, initialize Prisma in your project by running the following command:

```shell
npx prisma init
```

this will generate

- An env file
- A new directory with a schema.prisma file in it.


## Environment setup
To make everything work, change the value of the **`DATABASE_URL`** variable according to your credentials. In our case, the URL will become:

```shell
DATABASE_URL="postgresql://root:secret@localhost:5434/postgres?schema=public"
```

## Create migrations
Define the models in the `prisma/schema.prisma` file. For example:

```prisma
datasource db {
  provider = "postgresql"
  url = env("DATABASE_URL")
}

generator client {
  provider = "prisma-client-js"
  output = "@prisma/client"
}

model User {
  id       Int      @id @default(autoincrement())
  email    String   @unique
  password String
}

```

After defining your schema, run the following command to create the database tables:

```shell
prisma migrate dev --name init
```

## Database Viewer

you can view your database from prisma studio, run the following command to start prisma studio

```bash
npx prisma studio
```

you can access it on `http://localhost:5555` 

## Create Prisma Module for DB connection

We need to create a Prisma module to establish a connection between other services and the database. We can generate the Prisma module and service using the Nest CLI by running the following command:

```bash
npx nest g module prisma
npx nest g service prisma
```

his will generate a **`prisma`** module with a **`prisma.service.ts`** file.

Now we can add the logic that makes the connection to the database in the **`prisma.service.ts`** file.

```bash
import { Injectable } from '@nestjs/common';
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client';
@Injectable()
export class PrismaService extends PrismaClient {
  constructor() {
    super({
      datasources: {
        db: {
          url: 'postgresql://root:secret@localhost:5434/postgres?schema=public',
        },
      },
    });
  }
}
```

We can then export the **`PrismaService`** from the **`prisma.module.ts`** file to use it in other modules. We also need to use **@Global** to make it available in all the modules. Your **`prisma.module.ts`** file should look like this:

```bash
import { Global, Module } from '@nestjs/common';
import { PrismaService } from './prisma.service';

@Global()
@Module({
  providers: [PrismaService],
  exports: [PrismaService],
})
export class PrismaModule {}
```

To use the Prisma module in other modules, we need to import it in the desired module file. However, we can import modules globally from **`app.module.ts`.**

```tsx
import { Module } from '@nestjs/common';
import { PrismaModule } from './prisma/prisma.module';

@Module({
  imports: [PrismaModule],
})
export class AppModule {}
```

Now you can use **`PrismaService`** by using dependency injection in every service you want without importing the **`prisma`** module every time.

## Conclusion

Overall, my experience with NestJS and Prisma was very positive. The modular structure and dependency injection of NestJS, combined with the type-safe and efficient database access of Prisma would definately help us to make our application scalable and maintanable. If you're looking to build a new web application. NestJS and Prisma are definitely worth considering.
