---
    id: "04"
    title: "The impact of database indexing on query execution time"
    description: "In this blog post, We are going to see how database indexing can optimize your query performance."
    releaseDate: "May 08, 2023"
---

### [Back](/blogs)
# The impact of database indexing on query execution time
In today's era of computing, databases play a pivotal role in numerous applications, storing and managing large volumes of data. As the size and complexity of databases continue to grow, ensuring efficient and fast query execution becomes increasingly important. One powerful tool for optimizing query performance is database indexing and in this blog post we are going to see how database indexing can optimize your query performance.

## Why Indexing matters for query performance?
Indexing is a powerful tool for optimizing query performance in a database. An index is a data structure that stores a sorted list of values from the indexed columns of a table, along with pointers to corresponding rows in the table. This allows the database engine to quickly locate specific rows that match the query criteria, rather than scanning through every row in the table. This is because when querying an indexed table, the engine uses binary search instead of sequential search, which reduces the number of records to search for. Without an index, searching for a specific record in a large table can be slow and resource-intensive. For example, consider a table with employee records.

```shell
TABLE
----------------------------------
| id | name    | age | occupation |
----------------------------------
| 1  | Alice   | 25  | Engineer   |
----------------------------------
| 2  | Bob     | 30  | Designer   |
----------------------------------
| 3  | Charlie | 35  | Engineer   |
----------------------------------
| 4  | Dave    | 40  | Manager    |
----------------------------------
| ... | ...    | ... | ...        |
----------------------------------
```

Searching for a particular employee by name or occupation without an index would require scanning every row in the table, which could take a lot of time.

```shell
Sequential Search:
SELECT * FROM TABLE WHERE occupation = 'Engineer';

1. Start from the first row and compare the value of occupation column with 'Engineer'
2. If the value matches, return the row
3. Move to the next row and repeat the process until the end of the table is reached
```

however, with an index on the name or occupation column, the database can quickly locate the specific rows that match the query criteria, resulting in faster query execution times. 

```shell
INDEX (occupation)
--------------------
| value     | rowid |
--------------------
| Designer  | 2     |
--------------------
| Engineer  | 1     |
--------------------
| Engineer  | 3     |
--------------------
| Manager   | 4     |
--------------------

SELECT * FROM TABLE WHERE occupation = 'Engineer';

1. Search the index for the value 'Engineer'
2. Get the corresponding rowids (1 and 3)
3. Retrieve only the relevant rows (1 and 3) from the table (heap table)
```



## Different types of scans in databases and how Indexing affects them
Databases use different types of scans to retrieve data from tables, each with its own strengths and weaknesses. The most common types of scans are sequential, index, index-only, bitmap index, and parallel scans.

**Sequential scan:** A sequential scan is used when a table has no index, and the database engine reads every row in the table to find the matching data. This can be slow and resource-intensive for large tables.

**Index scan:** An index scan is used when a table has an index, allowing the engine to locate the matching data more efficiently by scanning through the index data.

**index only scan:** This type of scan is used when all the data required by the query is present in the index. In an index-only scan, the database engine reads the required data from the index, without accessing the corresponding table rows. This can be much faster than other scan types because it avoids accessing the table and reading unneeded data.

**Bitmap Index scan:** This type of scan is similar to an index scan but is more efficient for queries that involve multiple criteria. Instead of scanning through the entire index, the engine uses a bitmap to represent which rows match each search condition. The engine then combines the bitmaps to find the rows that match all the conditions.

**Parallel Scan:** Some database engines, such as PostgreSQL, support parallel scans. This means that the engine can use multiple threads to scan the table or index concurrently, which can speed up the query time for large tables.

I conducted a test to showcase how indexing can impact the performance of queries in PostgreSQL. For this, I created a students table with `50 million` records using docker. This table includes a primary key column that is automatically indexed.

To analyze the query performance, I used the "explain analyze" tool to analyze the performance of queries with different scan types, including sequential scan, index scan, index-only scan, bitmap index scan, and parallel scan.

## Sequential Scan
Sequential scan is a scan type used when a table does not have an index, and it involves reading every row in the table to find the matching data. To demonstrate this, let's run the following query on our students table:

```shell
explain analyze select * from students;
```

Since the query requires all records, the planner has no choice but to use a sequential scan. As a result, the query takes a considerable amount of time to execute, as seen in the output:

```shell
Seq Scan on students  (cost=0.00..135463.01 rows=5000001 width=104) (actual time=0.009..310.439 rows=5000001 loops=1)
Planning Time: 0.038 ms
Execution Time: 420.030 ms
```

The actual time taken to retrieve all 50 million records is around 310.439 ms, resulting in an execution time of 420.030 ms . This time can be very resource-intensive, especially for larger tables, and can negatively impact query performance.

## Parallel Sequential scan
When working with large tables and non-indexed columns in PostgreSQL, sequential scans are used to filter data. Sequential scans involve scanning every record in the table, which can be slow and inefficient.

To improve the performance of sequential scans, PostgreSQL offers a feature called parallel sequential scan. This feature splits the table into smaller chunks and uses multiple worker threads to scan each chunk in parallel, which can significantly speed up the scan.

To determine if PostgreSQL is using parallel sequential scan on a query, we can run the following command:
```shell
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT * FROM students WHERE g = 10;
```

The output of this command will show the execution plan used by PostgreSQL, including the number of worker threads launched and the time it took to execute the query. For example:

```shell
Gather  (cost=1000.00..117482.97 rows=49833 width=105) (actual time=1.663..116.795 rows=50067 loops=1)
   Workers Planned: 2
   Workers Launched: 2
   ->  Parallel Seq Scan on students  (cost=0.00..111499.67 rows=20764 width=105) (actual time=1.762..100.258 rows=16689 loops=3)
         Filter: (g = 10)
         Rows Removed by Filter: 1649978
 Planning Time: 0.046 ms
 JIT:
   Functions: 6
   Options: Inlining false, Optimization false, Expressions true, Deforming true
   Timing: Generation 0.923 ms, Inlining 0.000 ms, Optimization 0.437 ms, Emission 4.558 ms, Total 5.919 ms
 Execution Time: 118.372 ms
```
This example shows that the query launched two worker threads, and the total execution time was `118.372 ms`.

While parallel sequential scan can significantly improve the performance of sequential scans, it is still less efficient than using an indexed column for filtering. If the non-indexed column is frequently used in queries, consider creating an index on it to improve query performance.

## Index Scan
When you create an index on a column, the query planner can choose between an index scan and a bitmap heap scan, depending on the selectivity of the column and other factors. If the planner determines that using the index is not efficient enough due to low selectivity, then a bitmap heap scan may be chosen instead.

To increase the selectivity of a column, you can add conditions to the query, such as an **`id < 1000`** condition, to reduce the number of records to be retrieved. This can help the planner choose an index scan instead of a bitmap heap scan.

Let's take the example of creating an index on the **`g`** column of the **`students`** table

```shell
create index student_grade on students(g);
```

Now, if we run the same query as before with the added condition, we can see a significant improvement in query execution time:
```shell
explain analyze select * from students where g=10 and id<500000;
```
```shell
Index Scan using students_pkey on students  (cost=0.43..2260.10 rows=468 width=105) (actual time=0.017..5.504 rows=482 loops=1)
   Index Cond: (id < 50000)
   Filter: (g = 10)
   Rows Removed by Filter: 49517
 Planning Time: 0.086 ms
 Execution Time: 10.530 ms
```

In this case, the query planner chose an index scan, resulting in a query execution time reduction from 118.372 ms to  10.530 ms

## Bitmap Index scan

When an index scan is not efficient enough, the query planner may choose to use a bitmap index scan instead. This technique involves using a bitmap index to identify the pages in the table that contain matching rows, and then reading only those pages from the heap. It can be more efficient when there are many matching rows.

To encourage the planner to choose a bitmap index scan over an index scan, you can reduce the selectivity of the query. The more rows the query needs to search, the more likely it is that the planner will choose a bitmap index scan.

Let's take a look at an example query:

```shell
explain analyze select * from students where g=10;
```

Here's the resulting query plan:

```shell
Bitmap Heap Scan on students  (cost=558.64..77739.73 rows=49833 width=105) (actual time=9.423..77.318 rows=50067 loops=1)
   Recheck Cond: (g = 10)
   Heap Blocks: exact=38082
   ->  Bitmap Index Scan on student_grade  (cost=0.00..546.18 rows=49833 width=0) (actual time=4.993..4.993 rows=50067 loops=1)
         Index Cond: (g = 10)
 Planning Time: 0.058 ms
 Execution Time: 78.492 ms
```

As you can see, the planner has chosen a bitmap index scan for this query which took total execution time of `79.829 ms`.

## Index Only Scan

One of the most powerful optimization techniques in database query processing is the index only scan. As the name suggests, this technique involves scanning only the index and not accessing the actual data in the table's heap pages. This can result in significant performance gains when used appropriately.

To illustrate the power of index only scans, let's consider an example where we want to retrieve only the **`id`** and **`g`** columns from a table called **`students`**. Suppose we have created an index on the **`id`** and **`g`** columns together using the following SQL command:

```shell
create index g_id_idx on students(g, id) include (g, id);
```

Now, we can run the same query again:

```shell
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT id, g FROM students WHERE g = 10;
```

And here is the result:

```shell
Index Only Scan using g_id_idx on students  (cost=0.43..1750.86 rows=53167 width=8) (actual time=0.042..5.070 rows=49988 loops=1)
   Index Cond: (g = 10)
   Heap Fetches: 0
 Planning Time: 0.077 ms
 Execution Time: 6.379 ms
```

As you can see, the query planner was able to use an index only scan because we have created an index on the **`id`** and **`g`** columns together. The result was returned almost instantly, without even touching the heap table. The query execution time has been dropped to `6.379 ms` which is beautiful.

This demonstrates the power of an index only scan when it is possible to use it. However, keep in mind that it is not always possible, and it is still important to choose the appropriate index and optimize the query as much as possible.

-------------------------------------------------

# Conclusion

In conclusion, indexing plays a vital role in optimizing query performance in databases. It can significantly speed up query execution time by allowing the engine to quickly locate specific rows that match the query criteria, without scanning every row in the table. Understanding the different types of scans and how indexing affects them is crucial for developers and database administrators to optimize their queries. Through my test with PostgreSQL, it is clear that indexing can significantly improve query performance, and it is worth the effort to properly index tables in your databases.

