content/blogs/5.offset-vs-cursor-based-pagination-choosing-the-best-approach.md, before:

---
    id: "05"
    title: "Offset vs Cursor-Based Pagination: Choosing the Best Approach"
    description: "In this blog post, We are going to explore the offset and cursor pagination in detail with their performance test."
    releaseDate: "Sep 16, 2023"
---

### [Back](/blogs)
# Offset vs Cursor-Based Pagination: Choosing the Best Approach
When it comes to implementing pagination for large datasets in API responses, developers often find themselves at a crossroads, faced with the choice between offset-based and cursor-based pagination. Both methods have their merits and are suitable for specific use cases. In this article, we'll dive deep into these two approaches, clarify their differences, and provide insights into their advantages and drawbacks.

## Offset-Based Pagination
**Client-Side Parameters**
- Limit: Specifies the number of records to fetch per page.
- Offset: Indicates the starting point for data retrieval or the number of records to skip, essentially the initial position within the list of items.

**How It Works**
- The API skips a specified number of items as indicated by the offset and returns items from that point up to the designated limit.

**Advantages**
- **Simplicity:** Offset-based pagination is relatively straightforward to implement.
- **Static Data:** It excels when dealing with static datasets that don't undergo frequent changes.

**Ideal Usage**
- Offset-based pagination is typically employed when managing static data that remains relatively stable over time.

**Example**
Let's say you have a database containing a thousand books, and you want to display 10 books per page:

- First Page: Offset = 0, Limit = 10
- Second Page: Offset = 10, Limit = 10
- Third Page: Offset = 20, Limit = 10
- ... and so forth.

Here's an SQL Query for Offset-Based Pagination in this scenario:
```sql
-- SQL Query for Offset-Based Pagination
SELECT * FROM books
ORDER BY book_id
LIMIT 10 OFFSET 0; -- First Page

SELECT * FROM books
ORDER BY book_id
LIMIT 10 OFFSET 10; -- Second Page

-- And so on...
```

## Cursor-Based Pagination

**Client-Side Parameters**
- Limit: Specifies the number of records required per page.
- Cursor: Acts as a pointer to fetch data. The cursor is provided by the database and points to a specific item within the dataset.

**How It Works**
- In the initial API call, the frontend only provides the limit (the cursor is not included).
- The database returns a cursor pointing to the last item within the dataset in its response.
- In subsequent API calls, the frontend includes both the limit and the cursor value (pointing to the last records retrieved from the previous request).
- The database provides records that come after or before the cursor, up to the specified limit.

**Advantages**
- **Faster Data Retrieval:** Cursor-based pagination is highly efficient, particularly for real-time data.
- **Infinite Scrolling:** It is well-suited for implementing features like infinite scrolling.

**Ideal Usage**
- Cursor-based pagination shines in scenarios where data is frequently updated or changes occur in real-time.

**Example**

Consider the same scenario of a thousand books, with 10 books displayed per page. In this case, the book name serves as the cursor:

- First Page: Cursor = null, Limit = 10 (Assuming the last book fetched in the 10th record has the name "Atomic Habits").
- Second Page: Cursor = Fetch records whose name is greater than "Atomic Habits," Limit = 10 (Assuming the last book fetched in the 20th record has the name "Calculus").
- Third Page: Cursor = Fetch records whose name is greater than "Calculus," Limit = 10, and so on.

Here's the SQL Query for Cursor-Based Pagination in this context:

```sql
-- SQL Query for Cursor-Based Pagination
SELECT * FROM books
WHERE book_name > 'Atomic Habits' -- Assuming 'Atomic Habits' is the last book on the previous page
ORDER BY book_name
LIMIT 10;
-- First Page: Cursor = null

SELECT * FROM books
WHERE book_name > 'Calculus' -- Assuming 'Calculus' is the last book on the previous page
ORDER BY book_name
LIMIT 10;
-- Second Page: Cursor = 'Calculus'

-- And so on...
```

**Additional Note for Cursor-Based Pagination**
- When requesting the next page, the database is instructed to send records greater than the cursor. Similarly, when requesting the previous page, smaller records than the cursor are requested. This mechanism enables seamless navigation through the dataset.
- It's advisable to create an index on the column you intend to use as a cursor. This indexing enhances the performance and efficiency of cursor-based pagination.


Now that we have a solid understanding of both pagination methods, let's explore when to choose one over the other and why.

## Why Choose Cursor-Based over Offset-Based Pagination

- **Performance:** As the offset increases in offset-based pagination, it can become slow because the database needs to read up to the offset position, involving counting rows from disk. In contrast, cursor-based pagination directly points to the cursor's location, making it faster.
- **Dynamic Data:** Cursor-based pagination is better suited for dynamic data where records may be inserted or deleted, as it acts as a pointer to where the last request left off.

## Why Choose Offset-Based over Cursor-Based Pagination

- **Sorting Flexibility:** Offset-based pagination allows for easier sorting of data based on various attributes. In cursor-based pagination, the cursor must be a unique attribute that can be sequentially ordered, and data will always be sorted by that attribute.
- **User Navigation:** Offset-based pagination enables users to jump to specific pages directly, which is not easily achievable in cursor-based pagination.

## Pagination Performance Comparison

## Test 1: Offset 0, Limit 10

**Objective:** Retrieve book names and book IDs starting from offset 0 with a limit of 10.

**Offset-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10 offset 0;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.207 ms
Execution Time: 0.025 ms
(6 rows)
```

**Cursor-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.057 ms
Execution Time: 0.025 ms
```

## Test 2: Offset 10,000, Limit 10

**Objective:** Retrieve book titles and IDs starting from offset 10,000 with a limit of 10.

**Offset-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10 offset 10000;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.057 ms 
Execution Time: 3.138 ms
```

**Cursor-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" where id > 10000 group by id order by id ASC limit 10;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.071 ms
Execution Time: 0.026 ms
```

## Test 3: Offset 50,000, Limit 10

**Objective:** Retrieve book titles and IDs starting from offset 50,000 with a limit of 10.

**Offset-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10 offset 50000;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.082 ms
Execution Time: 16.933 ms
```

**Cursor-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" where id > 50000 group by id order by id ASC limit 10;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.071 ms
Execution Time: 0.027 ms
```

## Test 4: Offset 100,000, Limit 10

**Objective:** Retrieve book titles and IDs starting from offset 100,000 with a limit of 10.

**Offset-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10 offset 100000;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.070 ms
Execution Time: 30.166 ms
```

**Cursor-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" where id > 100000 group by id order by id ASC limit 10 ;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.066 ms
Execution Time: 0.027 ms
```

## Summary
| Scenario | Offset-Based Pagination | Cursor-Based Pagination |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Offset/Cursor 0, Limit 10 | 0.025ms | 0.025ms |
| Offset/Cursor 10,000, Limit 10 | 3.138ms | 0.026ms |
| Offset/Cursor 50,000, Limit 10 | 16.933ms | 0.027ms |
| Offset/Cursor 100,000, Limit 10 | 30.166ms | 0.027ms |

In the performance tests above, we observed that the execution time for offset-based pagination increases as the offset value grows. However, with cursor-based pagination, the execution time remains relatively consistent, even when the cursor changes :rocket: . This highlights one of the key advantages of cursor-based pagination in handling large datasets efficiently.

## Conclusion
In this article, we've explored the details of offset-based and cursor-based pagination and compared their performance. With this information, you can now make an educated choice about which pagination method works best for your particular requirements.

## Useful References

- [Pagination — Offset vs Cursor in MySQL](https://bojithapiyathilake.medium.com/pagination-offset-vs-cursor-in-mysql-92cbf1a02cfa)
- [The best database pagination technique is…](https://dev.to/appwrite/this-is-why-you-should-use-cursor-pagination-4nh5)
- [Understanding the Offset and Cursor Pagination](https://betterprogramming.pub/understanding-the-offset-and-cursor-pagination-8ddc54d10d98)

Commit message:

fix: change in 5th blog post

content/blogs/5.offset-vs-cursor-based-pagination-choosing-the-best-approach.md, after:

---
    id: "05"
    title: "Offset vs Cursor-Based Pagination: Choosing the Best Approach"
    description: "In this blog post, We are going to explore the offset and cursor pagination in detail with their performance test."
    releaseDate: "Sep 16, 2023"
---

### [Back](/blogs)
# Offset vs Cursor-Based Pagination: Choosing the Best Approach
When it comes to implementing pagination for large datasets in API responses, developers often find themselves at a crossroads, faced with the choice between offset-based and cursor-based pagination. Both methods have their merits and are suitable for specific use cases. In this article, we'll dive deep into these two approaches, clarify their differences, and provide insights into their advantages and drawbacks.

## Offset-Based Pagination
**Client-Side Parameters**
- Limit: Specifies how many records to fetch per page.
- Offset: Indicates where to start fetching data or how many records to skip, defining the initial position within the list.

**How It Works**
- In an API call, the frontend provides both the limit and offset.
- The database retrieves records starting from the given offset and returns them up to the limit.

**Advantages**
- **Simplicity:** Offset-based pagination is easy to implement.
- **Static Data:** It works well for static datasets that don't change frequently.

**Ideal Usage**
- It's a good fit for handling static data that doesn't change frequently.
- Ideal when you need to allow users to directly jump to a specific page.

**Drawback:**
The major drawback is that as the offset increases, the query becomes slower. This is because the database must read records up to the offset, which means if you have 1 million records, and you have to query 10 records after 10,000th row (limit = 10, offset = 10,000). The databae will read all the records from 0 to 99999 rows and return the 10 records after it. Isn’t it worst? Just think about it.

**Example**
Let's say you have a database of a thousand books, and you want to display 10 books per page:

- First Page: Offset = 0, Limit = 10
- Second Page: Offset = 10, Limit = 10
- Third Page: Offset = 20, Limit = 10
- ... and so forth.

Here's an SQL Query for Offset-Based Pagination in this scenario:
```sql
-- SQL Query for Offset-Based Pagination
SELECT * FROM books
ORDER BY book_id
LIMIT 10 OFFSET 0; -- First Page

SELECT * FROM books
ORDER BY book_id
LIMIT 10 OFFSET 10; -- Second Page

-- And so on...
```

## Cursor-Based Pagination

**Client-Side Parameters**
- Limit: Specifies the number of records required per page.
- Cursor: Acts as a pointer to fetch data. The cursor is provided by the database and points to a specific item within the dataset.

**How It Works**
- In the initial API call, the frontend only provides the limit (the cursor is not included).
- The database returns a cursor pointing to the last item within the dataset in its response.
- In subsequent API calls, the frontend includes both the limit and the cursor value (pointing to the last records retrieved from the previous request).
- The database provides records that come after or before the cursor, up to the specified limit.

**Advantages**
- **Faster Data Retrieval:** Cursor-based pagination is highly efficient, particularly for real-time data.
- **Infinite Scrolling:** It is well-suited for implementing features like infinite scrolling.

**Ideal Usage**
- Cursor-based pagination shines in scenarios where data is frequently updated or changes occur in real-time.

**Example**

Consider the same scenario of a thousand books, with 10 books displayed per page. In this case, the book name serves as the cursor:

- First Page: Cursor = null, Limit = 10 (Assuming the last book fetched in the 10th record has the name "Atomic Habits").
- Second Page: Cursor = Fetch records whose name is greater than "Atomic Habits," Limit = 10 (Assuming the last book fetched in the 20th record has the name "Calculus").
- Third Page: Cursor = Fetch records whose name is greater than "Calculus," Limit = 10, and so on.

Here's the SQL Query for Cursor-Based Pagination in this context:

```sql
-- SQL Query for Cursor-Based Pagination
SELECT * FROM books
WHERE book_name > 'Atomic Habits' -- Assuming 'Atomic Habits' is the last book on the previous page
ORDER BY book_name
LIMIT 10;
-- First Page: Cursor = null

SELECT * FROM books
WHERE book_name > 'Calculus' -- Assuming 'Calculus' is the last book on the previous page
ORDER BY book_name
LIMIT 10;
-- Second Page: Cursor = 'Calculus'

-- And so on...
```

**Additional Note for Cursor-Based Pagination**
- When requesting the next page, we ask the database to send us records greater than the cursor, or smaller if moving backward.
- It's advisable to create an index on the column you intend to use as a cursor. This indexing enhances the performance and efficiency of cursor-based pagination.


Now that we have a solid understanding of both pagination methods, let's explore when to choose one over the other and why.

## Why Choose Cursor-Based over Offset-Based Pagination

- **Performance:** As the offset increases in offset-based pagination, it can become slow because the database needs to read up to the offset position, involving counting rows from disk. In contrast, cursor-based pagination directly points to the cursor's location, making it faster.
- **Dynamic Data:** Cursor-based pagination is better suited for dynamic data where records may be inserted or deleted, as it acts as a pointer to where the last request left off.

## Why Choose Offset-Based over Cursor-Based Pagination

- **Sorting Flexibility:** Offset-based pagination allows for easier sorting of data based on various attributes. In cursor-based pagination, the cursor must be a unique attribute that can be sequentially ordered, and data will always be sorted by that attribute.
- **User Navigation:** Offset-based pagination enables users to jump to specific pages directly, which is not easily achievable in cursor-based pagination.

## Pagination Performance Comparison

## Test 1: Offset 0, Limit 10

**Objective:** Retrieve book names and book IDs starting from offset 0 with a limit of 10.

**Offset-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10 offset 0;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.207 ms
Execution Time: 0.025 ms
(6 rows)
```

**Cursor-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.057 ms
Execution Time: 0.025 ms
```

## Test 2: Offset 10,000, Limit 10

**Objective:** Retrieve book titles and IDs starting from offset 10,000 with a limit of 10.

**Offset-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10 offset 10000;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.057 ms 
Execution Time: 3.138 ms
```

**Cursor-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" where id > 10000 group by id order by id ASC limit 10;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.071 ms
Execution Time: 0.026 ms
```

## Test 3: Offset 50,000, Limit 10

**Objective:** Retrieve book titles and IDs starting from offset 50,000 with a limit of 10.

**Offset-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10 offset 50000;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.082 ms
Execution Time: 16.933 ms
```

**Cursor-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" where id > 50000 group by id order by id ASC limit 10;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.071 ms
Execution Time: 0.027 ms
```

## Test 4: Offset 100,000, Limit 10

**Objective:** Retrieve book titles and IDs starting from offset 100,000 with a limit of 10.

**Offset-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" group by id order by id ASC limit 10 offset 100000;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.070 ms
Execution Time: 30.166 ms
```

**Cursor-Based Pagination:**

```sql
select * from "Books" where id > 100000 group by id order by id ASC limit 10 ;
```

```shell
QUERY PLAN
-> Index Scan using "Books_pkey" on "Books"
Planning Time: 0.066 ms
Execution Time: 0.027 ms
```

## Summary
| Scenario | Offset-Based Pagination | Cursor-Based Pagination |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Offset/Cursor 0, Limit 10 | 0.025ms | 0.025ms |
| Offset/Cursor 10,000, Limit 10 | 3.138ms | 0.026ms |
| Offset/Cursor 50,000, Limit 10 | 16.933ms | 0.027ms |
| Offset/Cursor 100,000, Limit 10 | 30.166ms | 0.027ms |

In the performance tests above, we observed that the execution time for offset-based pagination increases as the offset value grows. However, with cursor-based pagination, the execution time remains relatively consistent, even when the cursor changes :rocket: . This highlights one of the key advantages of cursor-based pagination in handling large datasets efficiently.

## Conclusion
In this article, we've explored the details of offset-based and cursor-based pagination and compared their performance. With this information, you can now make an educated choice about which pagination method works best for your particular requirements.
